.TH ocs-sr 8 "2026-05-03" "Clonezilla" "Clonezilla Manual"
.SH NAME
ocs-sr \- Clonezilla: save or restore a disk or partition(s)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ocs-sr
[\fIOPTION\fR] {\fIsavedisk\fR|\fIsaveparts\fR|\fIrestoredisk\fR|\fIrestoreparts\fR} \fIIMAGE_NAME\fR \fIDEVICE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ocs-sr
is the main command of Clonezilla to save or restore a disk or partition(s).
It is usually used in Clonezilla live or in a DRBL environment.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B savedisk
Save the entire disk(s) as an image.
.TP
.B saveparts
Save the partition(s) as an image.
.TP
.B restoredisk
Restore the image to the entire disk(s).
.TP
.B restoreparts
Restore the image to the partition(s).
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Options for saving:
.TP
.B \-noabo, \-\-not\-only\-access\-by\-owner
Make the image of partition accessible by others (mode 644). Default is 600.
.TP
.B \-senc, \-\-skip\-enc\-ocs\-img
Skip encrypting the image with passphrase.
.TP
.B \-enc, \-\-enc\-ocs\-img
Encrypt the image with passphrase via ecryptfs.
.TP
.B \-sgoc, \-\-skip\-gocrypt\-ocs\-img
Skip encrypting the image with passphrase (gocryptfs).
.TP
.B \-goc, \-\-gocrypt\-ocs\-img
Encrypt the image with passphrase via gocryptfs.
.TP
.B \-sfsck, \-\-skip\-fsck\-src\-part
Skip running fsck on the source file system before saving it.
.TP
.B \-fsck, \-fsck\-src\-part, \-\-fsck\-src\-part
Run fsck interactively on the source file system before saving it.
.TP
.B \-fsck\-y, \-fsck\-src\-part\-y, \-\-fsck\-src\-part\-y
Run fsck automatically on the source file system before saving it. Attempt to fix any detected filesystem corruption automatically.
.TP
.B \-gm, \-\-gen\-md5sum
Generate the MD5 checksum for the image.
.TP
.B \-gs, \-\-gen\-sha1sum
Generate the SHA1 checksum for the image.
.TP
.B \-gb2, \-gb, \-\-gen\-b2sum
Generate the BLAKE2 checksum for the image.
.TP
.B \-gb3, \-\-gen\-b3sum
Generate the BLAKE3 checksum for the image.
.TP
.B \-gmf, \-\-gen\-chksum\-for\-files\-in\-dev
Generate the checksum for files in the source device.
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-image\-size SIZE
Set the size in MB to split the partition image file into multiple volumes files.
.TP
.B \-j2, \-\-clone\-hidden\-data
Use dd to clone the image of the data between MBR (1st sector) and 1st partition.
.TP
.B \-ntfs\-ok, \-\-ntfs\-ok
Assume the NTFS integrity is OK, do NOT check again (for ntfsclone only).
.TP
.B \-rm\-win\-swap\-hib, \-\-rm\-win\-swap\-hib
Try to remove the MS windows swap file and hibernation file in the source partition.
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-use\-ntfsclone
Use ntfsclone to save NTFS partition (Priority: ntfsclone > partimage > dd).
.TP
.B \-q1, \-\-force\-to\-use\-dd
Force to use dd to save partition(s) (inefficient, slow, but works for all file systems).
.TP
.B \-q2, \-\-use\-partclone
Use partclone to save partition(s) (Priority: partclone > partimage > dd).
.TP
.B \-rescue, \-\-rescue
Turn on rescue mode, i.e. try to skip bad sectors.
.TP
.B \-sc, \-scs, \-\-skip\-check\-restorable, \-\-skip\-check\-restorable\-s
Skip checking if the image is restorable after it is created.
.TP
.B \-z0, \-\-no\-compress
Don't compress when saving.
.TP
.B \-z1, \-\-gzip\-compress
Compress using gzip (default).
.TP
.B \-z1p, \-\-smp\-gzip\-compress
Compress using parallel gzip program (pigz).
.TP
.B \-z2, \-\-bz2\-compress
Compress using bzip2.
.TP
.B \-z2p, \-\-smp\-bzip2\-compress
Compress using parallel bzip2 program (lbzip2).
.TP
.B \-z3, \-\-lzo\-compress
Compress using lzop.
.TP
.B \-z4, \-\-lzma\-compress
Compress using lzma.
.TP
.B \-z5, \-\-xz\-compress
Compress using xz.
.TP
.B \-z5p, \-\-smp\-xz\-compress
Compress using parallel xz.
.TP
.B \-z6, \-\-lzip\-compress
Compress using lzip.
.TP
.B \-z6p, \-\-smp\-lzip\-compress
Compress using parallel lzip.
.TP
.B \-z7, \-\-lrzip\-compress
Compress using lrzip.
.TP
.B \-z8, \-\-lz4\-compress
Compress using lz4.
.TP
.B \-z8p, \-\-lz4mt\-compress
Compress using multi-threaded lz4.
.TP
.B \-z9, \-\-zstd\-compress
Compress using zstd.
.TP
.B \-z9p, \-\-zstdmt\-compress
Compress using parallel zstd (zstdmt).
.TP
.B \-sfs, \-\-skip\-fs\-save
Do not save the file system for device, just save the rest of files.
.TP
.B \-pe, \-\-passwd\-ecryptfs PASSWD
Set the password to encrypt the image (ecryptfs).
.TP
.B \-pfe, \-\-passwd\-file\-ecryptfs FILE
Set the password to encrypt the image in the FILE (ecryptfs).
.TP
.B \-pg, \-\-passwd\-gocryptfs PASSWD
Set the password to encrypt the image (gocryptfs).
.TP
.B \-pfg, \-\-passwd\-file\-gocryptfs FILE
Set the password to encrypt the image in the FILE (gocryptfs).
.TP
.B \-plu, \-\-put\-log\-files\-usb
Put Clonezilla live related log files to Clonezilla live USB drive.
.TP
.B \-scpt, \-\-skip\-check\-part\-table
Skip checking the partition table of the source disk.
.TP
.B \-luks, \-\-enable-luks MODE
Open LUKS device or not. MODE can be either yes or no.
.TP
.B \-dblk, \-\-decrypt\-bitlocker MODE
Decrypt BitLocker device or not. MODE can be either yes or no.
.SS Options for restoring:
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-from\-part PARTITION
Restore the partition from image or block device to a different partition.
.TP
.B \-g, \-\-grub\-install GRUB_PARTITION
Install grub in the MBR. GRUB_PARTITION can be "auto" or a device name.
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-resize\-partition
Resize the partition to fit the target partition size.
.TP
.B \-k, \-\-no\-fdisk, \-\-no\-create\-partition
Do NOT create partition table in target harddisk.
.TP
.B \-icrc
Skip Partclone CRC checking.
.TP
.B \-irhr
Skip removing the Linux udev hardware records on the restored GNU/Linux.
.TP
.B \-irvd
Skip removing the NTFS volume dirty flag after restoration.
.TP
.B \-ius
Skip updating syslinux-related files on the restored GNU/Linux.
.TP
.B \-iui
Skip updating initramfs file(s) on the restored GNU/Linux.
.TP
.B \-icds, \-\-ignore\-chk\-dsk\-size\-pt
Skip checking destination disk size before creating the partition table.
.TP
.B \-iefi, \-\-ignore\-update\-efi\-nvram
Skip updating boot entries in EFI NVRAM after restoring.
.TP
.B \-k0
Create partition table based on the partition table from the image (default).
.TP
.B \-k1
Create partition table in the target disk proportionally.
.TP
.B \-k2
Enter command line prompt to create partition table manually before restoring.
.TP
.B \-scr, \-\-skip\-check\-restorable\-r
Skip checking the image if restorable before restoring.
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-no\-restore\-mbr
Do NOT restore the MBR.
.TP
.B \-t1, \-\-restore\-raw\-mbr
Restore the prebuilt bootloader from syslinux (For Windows only).
.TP
.B \-t2, \-\-no\-restore\-ebr
Do NOT restore the EBR.
.TP
.B \-u, \-\-select\-img\-in\-client
Input the image name in clients.
.TP
.B \-e, \-\-load\-geometry
Force to use the saved CHS (cylinders, heads, sectors).
.TP
.B \-e1, \-\-change\-geometry NTFS\-BOOT\-PARTITION
Force to change the CHS value of NTFS boot partition after image is restored.
.TP
.B \-e2, \-\-load\-geometry\-from\-edd
Force to use the CHS from EDD (Enhanced Disk Device).
.TP
.B \-j, \-\-create\-part\-by\-sfdisk
Use sfdisk to create partition table (default).
.TP
.B \-j0, \-\-create\-part\-by\-dd
Use dd to dump the partition table from saved image instead of sfdisk.
.TP
.B \-j1, \-\-dump\-mbr\-in\-the\-end
Use dd to dump the MBR after disk image was restored.
.TP
.B \-j2, \-\-clone\-hidden\-data
Use dd to clone data between MBR and 1st partition (restoredisk mode only).
.TP
.B \-hn0 PREFIX
Change the hostname of MS Windows based on PREFIX-IP.
.TP
.B \-hn1 PREFIX
Change the hostname of MS Windows based on PREFIX-MAC.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-time\-to\-wait TIME
When not enough clients have connected, start anyways after TIME seconds.
.TP
.B \-cm, \-\-check\-md5sum
Check the MD5 checksum for the image.
.TP
.B \-cs, \-\-check\-sha1sum
Check the SHA1 checksum for the image.
.TP
.B \-cb2, \-cb, \-\-check\-b2sum
Check the BLAKE2 checksum for the image.
.TP
.B \-cb3, \-\-check\-b3sum
Check the BLAKE3 checksum for the image.
.TP
.B \-cmf, \-\-chk\-chksum\-for\-files\-in\-dev
Check the checksum for the files in the device.
.TP
.B \-srel, \-\-save\-restore\-error\-log
Save the error log file in the image dir.
.TP
.B \-\-mcast\-port NO
Assign the udp port number for multicast restore.
.TP
.B \-ssnf, \-\-skip\-set\-netboot\-first
Skip setting 1st boot device as network in uEFI NVRAM.
.SS General options:
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-language INDEX
Set the language to be shown by index number (e.g., 0 or en_US.UTF-8).
.TP
.B \-b, \-batch, \-\-batch
Run program in batch mode (dangerous!).
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-confirm
Wait for confirmation before saving or restoring.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-debug\-mode
Enter command mode to debug.
.TP
.B \-\-debug=LEVEL
Output the partimage debug log in directory /var/log/ with debug LEVEL.
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-module MODULE
Force to load kernel module MODULE.
.TP
.B \-\-use\-netcat
Use netcat instead of nuttcp for network clone.
.TP
.B \-\-net\-filter PROGRAM
Use PROGRAM (gzip, bzip2, xz, lz4, zstd, cat) as network filter.
.TP
.B \-o0, \-\-run\-prerun\-dir
Run the script in prerun directory before clone is started.
.TP
.B \-o1, \-o, \-\-run\-postrun\-dir
Run the script in postrun directory when clone is finished.
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-wait\-time TIME
Wait for TIME seconds before saving/restoring.
.TP
.B \-nogui, \-\-nogui
Do not show GUI (TUI), use text only.
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-no\-force\-dma\-on
Do not force to turn on HD DMA.
.TP
.B \-mp, \-\-mount\-point MOUNT_POINT
Use NFS to mount MOUNT_POINT as directory ocsroot.
.TP
.B \-or, \-\-ocsroot DIR
Specify DIR (absolute path) as directory ocsroot.
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-postaction ACTION
Action when finished: [choose|poweroff|reboot|command|CMD].
.TP
.B \-ps, \-\-play\-sound
Play sound when the job is done.
.TP
.B \-ns, \-\-ntfs\-progress\-in\-image\-dir
Save the ntfsclone progress tmp file in the image dir.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-source\-IP IPADD
Assign the IP address of source machine for device to device cloning.
.TP
.B \-bm, \-\-beginner\-mode
Run in beginner mode.
.TP
.B \-em, \-\-expert\-mode
Run in expert mode.
.TP
.B \-um, \-\-user\-mode [beginner|expert]
Specify the user mode.
.TP
.B \-edio, \-\-enable\-direct\-io
Enable the direct IO mode of Partclone for NVMe SSD.
.TP
.B \-smtd, \-\-save\-mtdblock
Save MTD block device.
.TP
.B \-smmcb, \-\-save\-mmcblk
Save eMMC boot device.
.TP
.B \-rmtd, \-\-restore\-mtdblock
Restore MTD block device.
.TP
.B \-rmmcb, \-\-restore\-mmcblk
Restore eMMC boot device.
.TP
.B \-uoab, \-\-use\-ocs\-alias\-blkdev
Use Clonezilla alias block device name (e.g., ocs-*d*).
.TP
.B \-reluks, \-\-reencrypt\-luks
Reencrypt LUKS encrypted volumes in-place.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Prints verbose information.
.TP
.B \-d0, \-\-dialog
Use dialog.
.TP
.B \-d1, \-\-Xdialog
Use Xdialog.
.TP
.B \-d2, \-\-whiptail
Use whiptail.
.TP
.B \-d3, \-\-gdialog
Use gdialog.
.TP
.B \-d4, \-\-kdialog
Use kdialog.
.TP
.B \-x, \-\-interactive
Interactive mode.
.TP
.B \-os, \-\-ocs\-server SRV
Assign the OCS server as SRV.
.SH RESERVED WORDS
.SS For IMAGE_NAME:
.TP
.B ask_user
Prompt user to input a name.
.TP
.B autoname
Automatically generate image name based on MAC address and time.
.TP
.B autohostname
Automatically generate image name based on hostname.
.TP
.B autoproductname
Automatically generate image name based on hardware product model.
.SS For DEVICE:
.TP
.B ask_user
Prompt user to select the source device.
.TP
.B all
Select all unmounted local disks or partitions.
.SH EXAMPLES
To save all data in local 1st harddrive 'sda' as image 'IMAGE1', use ntfsclone, and lzop compression:
.IP
ocs-sr \-\-use\-ntfsclone \-z3 savedisk IMAGE1 sda
.PP
To save the data in 1st and 2nd partition in local first harddrive 'sda' as image 'IMAGE2', use ntfsclone:
.IP
ocs-sr \-\-use\-ntfsclone \-z3 saveparts IMAGE2 "sda1 sda2"
.PP
To restore image IMAGE1 to local sda, and grub-install will be run after cloning:
.IP
ocs-sr \-g auto restoredisk IMAGE1 sda
.PP
To restore the image for the 1st and 2nd partition from IMAGE2 to local sda1 and sda2, and grub-install will be run after restoring:
.IP
ocs-sr \-g auto restoreparts IMAGE2 "sda1 sda2"
.PP
To save disk(s)/partition(s) as an image or restore an image to disk(s)/partition(s) interactively, use:
.IP
ocs-sr \-x
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/drbl/drbl-ocs.conf
The configuration file for Clonezilla.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR drbl-ocs (8),
.BR ocs-onthefly (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Steven Shiau <steven _at_ clonezilla org>
